The Project Gutenberg eBook of Psyche: The Cult of Souls and Belief in Immortality among the Greeks
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Psyche: The Cult of Souls and Belief in Immortality among the Greeks

Author: Erwin Rohde

Translator: W. B. Hillis

Release date: October 17, 2021 [eBook #66555]
                Most recently updated: October 18, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Ed Brandon from material at the Internet Archive


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PSYCHE: THE CULT OF SOULS AND BELIEF IN IMMORTALITY AMONG THE GREEKS ***

Psyche

The Cult of Souls and Belief in Immortality among the Greeks


By

ERWIN ROHDE



LONDON
KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER & CO., LTD.
NEW YORK: HARCOURT, BRACE & COMPANY, INC.
1925



Translated from the eighth edition by

W. B. HILLIS. M.A.


_Printed in Great Britain by Stephen Austin & Sons, Ltd., Hertford._



CONTENTS


                                                                PAGE.


      PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  VII
      PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   XI
      PRELIMINARY NOTE TO THE SEVENTH AND EIGHTH EDITION         XIII
      TRANSLATOR'S NOTE  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   XV

PART I

CHAP.
   I. BELIEFS ABOUT THE SOUL AND CULT OF SOULS IN THE HOMERIC
           POEMS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    3
  II. ISLANDS OF THE BLEST. _Translation_      . . . . . . . . .   55
 III. CAVE DEITIES. SUBTERRANEAN _Translation_       . . . . . .   88
  IV. HEROES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  115
   V. THE CULT OF SOULS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  156
             I.  Cult of Chthonic Deities  . . . . . . . . . . .  158
            II.  Funeral ceremonies and worship of the dead  . .  162
           III.  Traces of the Cult of Souls in the Blood Feud
                      and Satisfaction for murder  . . . . . . .  174
  VI. THE ELEUSINIAN MYSTERIES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  217
 VII. IDEAS OF THE FUTURE LIFE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  236

PART II

VIII. ORIGINS OF THE BELIEF IN IMMORTALITY. THE THRACIAN WORSHIP
           OF DIONYSOS   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  253
  IX. DIONYSIAC RELIGION IN GREECE. ITS AMALGAMATION WITH
           APOLLINE RELIGION. ECSTATIC PROPHECY. RITUAL
           PURIFICATION AND EXORCISM. ASCETICISM . . . . . . . .  282
   X. THE ORPHICS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  335
  XI. THE PHILOSOPHERS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  362
 XII. THE LAY AUTHORS (LYRIC POETS--PINDAR--THE TRAGEDIANS)  . .  411
{vi}
XIII. PLATO  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  463
 XIV. THE LATER AGE OF THE GREEK WORLD . . . . . . . . . . . . .  490
            I. Philosophy  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  490
           II. Popular Belief  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  524

APPENDIX
   I. Consecration of persons struck by lightning  . . . . . . .  581
  II. ~maschalismo/s~  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  582
 III. ~amu/êtoi, a/gamoi~, Danaids in the lower world  . . . . .  586
  IV. The Tetralogies of Antiphon  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  588
   V. Ritual Purification  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  588
  VI. Hekate and the ~Hekatika\ pha/smata~ . . . . . . . . . . .  590
 VII. The Hosts of Hekate  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  593
VIII. Disintegration of Consciousness and Reduplication of
           Personality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  595
  IX. The Great Orphic Theogony  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  596
   X. Previous Lives of Pythagoras. His Descent to Hades . . . .  598
  XI. Initiation considered as Adoption by the god . . . . . . .  601
 XII. Magical Exorcisms of the Dead  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  603


{{vii}}

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION


THIS book offers an account of the opinions held by the Greeks about
the life of the human soul after death, and is thus intended as a
contribution to the history of Greek religion. Such an undertaking
has in a special measure to contend with the difficulties that face
any inquiry into the religious life and thought of the Greeks. Greek
religion was a natural growth, not a special foundation, and the
ideas and feelings which gave it its inward tone and outward shape
never received abstract formulation. It expressed itself in
religious performances alone: it had no sacred books from which we
might determine the inward meaning and interconnexion of the ideas
with which the Greeks approached the gods created by their faith.
The central essence of the religion held by the Greek people, in
spite of this absence of conceptual formulation--or perhaps because
of it--preserved its original character to a remarkable degree: the
speculations and fancies of Greek poets continually refer to this
central nucleus. Indeed the poets and philosophers in such of their
writings as have come down to us are our only authorities for the
religious thought of the Greeks. In the present inquiry they have
naturally had to be our guides for the greater part of the way. But
though under the special conditions of Greek life the religious
views of poets and philosophers represent an important side of Greek
religion, they yet allow us to perceive very clearly the independent
and self-determined position with regard to the ancestral religion
retained by the individual. The individual believer might always, if
his own temper and disposition allowed him, give himself up to the
plain and unsophisticated emotions which had shaped and decided the
faith of the people and the religious performances of popular
~euse/beia~. But we should know very little of the religious ideas
that filled the mind of the believing Greek if we had to do without
the evidence of philosophers and poets (and of some Attic orators as
well) in whose words dumb and inarticulate emotion finds expression.
The inquirer would, however, be entirely on the wrong track {viii}
and be led to some remarkable conclusions who ventured without more
ado to deduce from the religious ideas that find expression in Greek
literature a complete Theology of the Greek _people_. Where direct
literary statements and allusions fail us we are left with nothing
but surmises in face of the religion of the Greeks and its inmost
guiding forces. Of course there are plenty of people of sanguine
temperament and industrious fancy who find no difficulty in
producing for our benefit the most admirable solutions of the
problem. Others in varying degrees of good faith press the emotions
of Christian piety into the service of explaining ancient faith in
gods. Thus injustice is done to both forms of religion and an
understanding of the essentials of Greek belief in its true and
independent reality is made completely impossible. A good example of
this is provided by the Eleusinian Mysteries, and by that favourite
topic of controversy (which has, indeed, received more than its due
share of attention from students of religion), the amalgamation of
the worship of gods and the belief in Souls said to have taken place
therein. Nowhere else has the complete unprofitableness of the
attempt to make use of the shifting ideas and tendencies of modern
civilization to explain the underlying motive forces of these
significant cult practices, been more strikingly and repeatedly
demonstrated. On this head in particular the author of the present
work has renounced all attempts to cast a fitful and ambiguous light
upon the venerable gloom of the subject by the help of the farthing
dip of his own private imaginings. There is no denying that here as
in so many departments of ancient ~euse/beia~ there is something
greater and finer that eludes our grasp. The revealing word, never
having been written down, has been lost. Instead of trying to find a
substitute in modern catch phrases it seems better simply to
describe, in the plainest and most literal fashion, the actual
phenomena of Greek piety exactly as they are known to us. There will
be plenty of opportunity for the author's own suggestions and they
need not always obtrude themselves. The aim of this work is to make
plain the facts of the Greek _Cult of Souls_ and of that belief in
immortality the inner workings of which are only partially
intelligible to our most sympathetic efforts to understand them. To
give a clearer presentation of the origin and development of those
practices and those beliefs; to distinguish the transformations
through which they passed and their relationship with other and
kindred intellectual tendencies; to disentangle the many different
lines of thought and speculation from the inextricable {ix}
confusion in which they lie in many minds (and in many books) and to
let them stand out clearly and distinctly one from another, seemed
particularly desirable. Why this design has not been carried out by
the same methods throughout; why it has sometimes seemed sufficient
to give a bald summary of the essential points, while at other times
certain topics are pursued into their most distant ramifications
(sometimes with apparently irrelevant prolixity), will be obvious
enough to those who are familiar with the subject. Where a more
careful examination of the overflowing mass of detail was to be
attempted advantage has been taken of the Appendix to achieve a
greater, though still only a relative degree of completeness. This
was made possible by the lengthy period which elapsed between the
publication of the two parts of the book. The first half [to the end
of chapter vii] appeared as long ago as the spring of 1890.
Un